The government's anti-strike bill violates international law
The Sunak government's Strikes (Minimum Service Levels) Bill is due for a Second Reading on Monday 16 January. The proposed legislation effectively allows Business Secretary Grant Shapps to write "minimum service regulations" of an unknown kind to force nurses, firefighters, teachers, rail or border staff to work. In 1997, Tony Blair said UK laws were already "the most restrictive on trade unions in the Western world". The new law would let employers give a "work notice" that will "identify the persons required to work". If workers fail to comply, they can be fired, even during a good faith trade dispute to prevent pay cuts, and the union can be sued into bankruptcy, for the first time since 1906.

Government arguments misrepresent laws across Europe
Earlier in January, Prime Minister Rishi Sunak told Parliament "the International Labour Organisation (ILO) supports minimum service levels… they're present in France, in Italy, in Spain". Grant Shapps added Germany to this list, and claimed the ILO "says that minimum service levels are a proportionate way of balancing the right to strike with the need to protect the wider public." This is not true. In France, the so called "minimum service" laws simply require 48 hours' notice for transport unions to strike (eg, Transport Code article L1324-7), or five days for health workers (Labour Code article L-2512-2). This is purely so that employers can find other staff to cover. In the UK, the law already requires two weeks' notice, plus an extra week to tell the employer before a strike ballot, and the ballot must be by post - often taking four weeks. The French right to strike is individual. There is no sacking or suing. Collective agreements cover 98 per cent of French workers, who enjoy 10 per cent higher disposable incomes, and a shorter working week.

In Italy, minimum service levels are agreed in collective agreements with unions, based on Law No. 146 of 1990, which unions effectively drafted. There is no right of the government, let alone an employer, to force people to work or sack them, or sue the union. In Spain, the Constitutional Court tightly controls all limits on the right to strike, for strict safety or security reasons. In Germany, unions make collective agreements for minimum services, and only when an agreement cannot be reached may a court step in; it is not a government minister, let alone an employer who has the power to decide. Germany has no requirement for arcane postal ballots before strikes, it enables workers to take solidarity action, and it protects the right of workers to elect company directors, like most rich countries.

Finally, the ILO does not "support" minimum service levels. It has never said a plan like the Shapps Bill is a "proportionate" balance. It requires that for any minimum service levels at all, unions "must be able to participate" in setting them. Only if that is not possible it should be settled by "an independent body having the confidence of the parties", not a minister or employer (ILO 2018, §§882-3).

Rolling back hard-won rights
Sunak and Shapps have misled Parliament. The proposed Bill gives all power to ministers like Shapps to write the rules. It lets employers give a "work order". If people do not comply they will be fired, or the union can be sued into bankruptcy. This is forced labour. It is a gross violation of international law. It must fail.

The right to fair pay and collective action are inalienable rights, enshrined in the Universal Declaration that followed the Second World War, and the International Bill of Rights of 1966. These rights exist because workers, faced with authoritarian employers and governments, could always do one thing: they could just say "No. If they don't pay, we won't work." Strikes brought down the Kaiser. Strikes forced the Empire to quit India. Strikes opened the Iron Curtain. Strikes finished Apartheid in South Africa. The right to strike is the vanguard of democracy and freedom, and whether they have the self-awareness or not, Sunak and Shapps are treading blindly down the road to tyranny, like Viktor Orbán's Hungary, or Vladimir Putin's Russia. "It is absolutely essential that all authority in the factories should be concentrated in the hands of the management", wrote Lenin in 1922. "The trade unions must collaborate closely and constantly with the government." The Shapps Bill is really a "Pay Cut and Forced Labour Bill". It is not the law of a free country.

There is an alternative
But what should the government do to stop the strikes? First, it should not cut public workers' pay: an inflation protected pay rise would cost just £10bn, after tax and National Insurance receipts, on the government's own figures. This money can come from taxing Shell, BP and big fossil fuel polluters whose excess profits have inflated bills and prices. Second, it should rebuild fair pay scales through sector-wide, good faith collective bargaining, and the right of workers to elect at least a third to half of directors on their enterprise board. Third, it should repeal the anti-strike laws, and enshrine a positive right to take collective action, including in solidarity, against reckless management shut downs.

Britain needs a more cooperative, enterprising culture in management. Good employers do not want to be undermined and undercut by ministers or bosses who force others to bear the costs of their mistakes, or stuff other people's money into their pockets. Employers owe their power to the work that people give, and that power can only be justified by democracy in our economy, and mutual respect.

Is a two-tier healthcare system inevitable in the UK?

The NHS faces significant pressure due to a combination of a decade of under-funding, inflation and the COVID-19 pandemic, which has led to more and more people paying to access healthcare from for-profit companies.

For some, this rapid growth in out-of-pocket payments suggests the UK is moving to a two-tier healthcare system. A system where those with money to pay for care can access it faster than those who are forced to wait for treatment on the NHS. And a situation that runs contrary to the founding principles of the NHS, whereby access to healthcare is supposed to be determined by need, rather than ability to pay.

The growth in for-profit healthcare in the UK
In some treatment areas, the growth of for-profit healthcare provision in the UK has been startling. In 2021, partly because of the restrictions imposed on the NHS due to COVID, the for-profit sector delivered more hip and knee operations than the NHS for the first time in its history.

In addition, between 2016 and 2022 the percentage of NHS funded cataract surgery provided by for-profit providers grew from 11% to 46% making the for-profit sector now the dominant provider of this form of treatment in the UK.

Whilst the bread and butter of the for-profit healthcare sector has been these two forms of elective care, in London the biggest earner for private hospitals is now cancer care.

Government support for the for-profit healthcare sector in the UK
The mainly overseas owned for-profit healthcare sector has achieved this position in the UK healthcare system because of government policy; over the past 2 decades the state has provided subsidies and guaranteed taxpayer revenues to underpin their expansion.

These subsidies have come in the following forms. First, to underwrite the investments of multi-national healthcare companies in building healthcare facilities, the Labour government during the 2000s, provided a direct subsidy estimated at around £350 million.

Second, by opening up the NHS market for elective operations to for-profit companies various governments have provided them with a relatively risk free income stream at prices which enable them to generate a generous profit margin. Taxpayer funds now account for between a third and three-quarters of the income of the largest for-profit companies in the UK.

Finally, because for-profit companies do not employ the medical consultants who carry out the treatment, but instead contract them out on a freelance basis, they are able to benefit at no cost from the training and development of this expert workforce.

Given that it costs around £0.5m to train a doctor to the level of a consultant and that there are an estimated 17,500 NHS consultants working privately in the UK, this means that overseas investors are given access free of charge to a highly trained, expert workforce worth £8.5 billion.

A bet against the NHS
In addition to reducing the financial risk of investing in private healthcare facilities, government cuts to the NHS budgets have also encouraged the for-profit sector to wager a bet that the NHS will not be able to meet the healthcare needs of a growing and aging population.

As JP Morgan noted in 2017 "continued structural pressure on the NHS will increasingly necessitate the use of the most efficient providers and is likely to lead to more outsourcing to the private sector. If not, we still believe the private sector will benefit as individuals are increasingly forced to dip into their own pockets to fund their care"

The value of this bet can be quantified by the investment by overseas owned companies in new private healthcare facilities. We estimate that between 2014 and 2022 around £2 billion has been invested in newly opened facilities, investment that is on top of ongoing costs. In contrast, the NHS's investment in new hospitals has been just £761 million since 2014, £322m of which was for one hospital.

Limitations on the growth of the for-profit sector
Whilst the for-profit healthcare sector is able to exploit the managed decline of the NHS, there are constraints on its ability to supplant or replace the NHS.

The growth in out-of-pocket payments for healthcare since the pandemic is remarkable, but it is unclear if it is sustainable. It is likely that some of the recent purchases of elective health care have come from the build-up of cash savings during lockdown. The squeeze on disposable incomes due to energy cost increases and mortgage rises will also slow this growth.

Similarly, the cheap credit options offered to private patients to encourage them to pay out of pocket are likely to dry up as result of increased borrowing rates. The take-up of private health insurance has also stalled for several years due to its increased cost relative to average incomes.

The second constraint are workforce shortages, a problem which is limiting the ability of healthcare systems the world over to meet population need. Workforce shortages in the UK are particularly acute amongst consultant level doctors that are critical for the delivery of the types of healthcare provided by the for-profit sector.

The problem for the for-profit sector is that it does not have any control over how these scarce workforce resources are allocated. In most cases the medical consultants who deliver care in for-profit sector do so on a freelance basis. Their NHS employers can limit how much time they commit to working in the for-profit sector.

In recent years, several for-profit companies have tried to pull medical consultants away from their NHS work by offering them lucrative share ownership schemes and in some cases offering them well remunerated employment contracts. But, unless the consultant workforce is untethered from the NHS - likely hugely controversial and detrimental to their long-term training and development - this employment arrangement limits how big the for-profit sector can grow.

Although a two-tier system may benefit a small proportion of users, it ultimately undermines one of the key solidaristic principles of the post-war welfare settlement. And to reiterate, the growth of a two-tier system has not happened overnight, nor has the for-profit sector magicked into existence the infrastructure to provide an alternative to NHS care. Nor is a two-tier system inevitable due to market forces. It is in fact the product of government policy over the past two decades and any government can, if they choose, reverse this trend by sustained investment in the NHS and the removal of subsidies which promote the growth of for-profit provision in the UK.

After the G20 Summit: UK responses to a new balance of power

The recent G20 summit in Bali began with high expectations from the world's twenty richest countries. Observers looked to G20 leaders to resolve a range of major crises, from rampant global inflation and ever-higher energy costs to grain supply issues emanating from Russia's invasion of Ukraine and the beginnings of a world-wide recession. Although the summit ended with some bilateral successes, it lacked the support of all G20 members to unanimously condemn Moscow's ongoing military actions towards Kyiv.

Such an outcome did however unveil some increasingly familiar dynamics within global affairs. At their heart, they underscored a new balance of power in world politics that is highly Asia-centric - indeed Indo-Pacific-centric - focused upon China and India. Accurately understanding and responding to this new reality will be critical to the next decades of UK foreign policy. It also holds significance for the government's forthcoming Integrated Review, which in 2021 focused upon the UK's three fundamental national interests - sovereignty, security and prosperity - and ‘our values of democracy and a commitment to universal human rights, the rule of law, freedom of speech and faith, and equality'.

How to appropriately react to China's great power emergence is now the central conundrum that co-joins all of the UK's national security interests. Here, balancing the economic benefits of closer links with Beijing with increasingly difficult political ties will remain crucial for London, along with preserving the rules-based international order. Moreover, China is now promoting an alternative - and at times heavily authoritarian - vision of the world, which innately challenges any western dominance of global affairs. If such a conception becomes ascendant, it would further diminish the UK's influence.

Xi's China
The recent 20th National Party Congress of the Chinese Communist Party marked President Xi Jinping's assumption of unlimited power in China. Xi's rise has come in the context of China's own rise over the last decades to become a great power in global affairs. Via its now world-leading economic and major military power, Beijing is quickly converting this prowess into diplomatic, institutional and structural influence. This includes building new multilateral regimes (namely the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank and the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation) but also huge infrastructure projects (the $8 trillion valued Belt and Road Initiative) and the world's largest free-trade agreement (the Regional Comprehensive Partnership Agreement worth $29.7 trillion).

Despite increasing Chinese power causing major frictions in bilateral relations between several G20 members (from land disputes with India to domestic interference in Canada), Beijing's centrality to international affairs has also become increasingly apparent. Within these dynamics, China is needed by other actors to help resolve the system's most pressing crises, be they the climate emergency or the war in Ukraine.

Thus, in a bilateral meeting at the G20 between President Biden and President Xi, the United States' leader openly urged for conciliation and dismissed fears of a new Cold War. He also stated that "I do not think there is any imminent attempt on the part of China to invade Taiwan". Such statements aim to reassure a Beijing that has been targeted by western narratives of China being a major threat to global stability, and to maximise possible diplomatic gains.

Reflective of this difficult balancing act, British Prime Minister Sunak has also had to openly recognise China's indisputable great power prowess, stating that "we're not going to be able to resolve shared global challenges like climate change, or public health, or indeed actually dealing with Russia and Ukraine, without having a dialogue with them." Furthermore, in a recent speech, although the Prime Minister noted that the "golden era" of UK-China relations (that was heralded during a 2015 UK visit by Xi Jinping) may have ended, he did not name China as a "threat" and instead called for "robust pragmatism".

The elephant in the room
China is not the only Asian giant on the world stage. In some ways 20 years behind China in terms of economic, military and diplomatic prowess, India can now be regarded on many measures as a top tier - great - power in global affairs that is ever-more influential.

New Delhi had the world's third largest economy (in GDP PPP terms) in 2020, which ranked at $8.44 trillion behind only the United States ($19.84 trillion) and China ($23.01 trillion). In the last decade, India has overtaken a host of other leading powers - including Japan, Germany, France and the United Kingdom - and (if current annual growth rates persist) may have the world's largest economy sometime in the 2040s. India's soon to be world leading - and very young - population will aid these dynamics.

In terms of military spending, India is also now ranked at a similar level, with total spending in 2021 standing at $76.6 billion, which is only behind China ($293.35 billion) and the United States ($778.4 billion), having recently overtaken Saudi Arabia and Russia. This significance is further underlined by India being the largest importer of weapons for the period from 1950 to 2021. In 2021 its largest supplier of weapons was France then Russia, the United States, Israel, South Korea and the United Kingdom.

More crucially, at the G20, India emerged as a crucial strategic bridge between its partners in the West and Russia, with whom it has enjoyed a very close relationship during and after the Cold War. This status is reflective of India being "a wily chameleon on the world stage that is able to foster positive relations with a range of countries". Such an influence is further shown by India's wider involvement in the Indo-Pacific, especially via "the Quad" (consisting of the United States, Japan, Australia and India) who all wish to openly bolster democracy in the region as part of their "rules-based" international order vision.

An Asian-centric multipolar future
In the longer term, such omni-directional ties will further enhance New Delhi's diplomatic and strategic worth on the global stage, making it a highly vital, necessary and pivotal strategic partner. Underpinning these linkages is a desire on the behalf of India and China for a multipolar world order. Such an order would not be dominated by a single power, as is the case in the current declining liberal international order under the aegis of the United States. Instead, it would consist of the United States, China, India and Russia (and in some formulations also the European Union and Japan), making it highly Asian-centric in nature and consecrating the concentration of power in the Indo-Pacific region.

For the UK, embracing this new balance of power and this new strategic reality is essential. Such an embrace will involve not only recognising the multi-faceted centrality of China and India to global affairs. It also requires acknowledging that a multipolar future will be necessarily highly complex, often counter-intuitive and constantly evolving.

Such an embrace would not be a capitulation to Beijing and New Delhi but would rest upon a positive-sum mindset that understands that positive economic ties can be concurrently pursued alongside protecting all the UK's core interests and political values. Moreover, both China and India also seek recognition and status in international affairs. Ultimately, London - in unison with other western powers - can confer this prestige, which will make it the central diplomatic tool for UK leaders to use in decades to come.

Why the English and British don't see eye to eye when it comes to immigration

Debates surrounding the control of borders feature prominently in the political sphere. Immigration fears, for example, dominated much of the Brexit debate. Fortunately, we know much about the economic impact of immigration. Consistently, studies have found that immigration has benign, if not zero, impacts on the wages of natives. Recent evidence also suggests that immigration has had a positive impact on UK productivity.

Focusing specifically on the UK, an assessment by the Migration Advisory Committee consisting of a review of academic research, as well as its own analysis, concluded that immigration has had little impact on employment outcomes or the wages of natives, but may have had some small negative impacts for lower skilled workers and small positive ones for those with higher educational qualifications. One reason for this is that migrants tend to complement, as opposed to compete against, existing workers, by often doing the tasks others don't want to do. An additional reason is that as migrants enter the labour market, they create jobs by using the wages they earn to support economic activity, helping the economy to expand.

The power of perceptions
The small number of studies internationally that do find negative wage effects show that these effects are small and generally only apparent for certain sub-groups of the population. You have to splice the data very thinly and look at very specific groups to observe any negative impacts and, even then, the overall effect tends to be positive. One thing that everyone can agree on, irrespective of attitudes towards immigration, is that in comparison to other tools at a government's disposal (such as taxes, minimum wage legislation, regulations, investments in education and infrastructure and public sector pay) restricting immigration is an ineffective (and possibly harmful) tool for increasing people's wages.

Another common immigration concern is that migrants will be a drain on public resources. In reality, the opposite is true as migrants are on the whole substantive net contributors to the public purse. This is because, on average, they are more likely to be at work, are often educated elsewhere and are less likely to access social services. Of course, one can easily understand negative sentiments here. Due to, amongst other things, the accession of new member states to the EU, the UK witnessed large increases in migrant flows at the same time as public services were cut due to austerity. It is easy in these circumstances to mistakenly attribute increased waiting times for an NHS appointment to increasing numbers of migrants.

Focusing on economic well-being may, therefore, only tell us part of the story when it comes to understanding the sharp polarisation on immigration issues. In new research, my colleague and I looked at the relationship between inflows of migrants into local areas and the self-reported (subjective) well-being of the existing residents in those areas. We did this by matching the UK Household Longitudinal Study, a large annual household survey of approximately 50,000 respondents, that records individuals' well-being, with data from the office for national statistics capturing the numbers of migrants living across local authority areas. The specific well-being indicators that we used were self-reported life satisfaction and what is known as the General Health Questionnaire. The former simply asks individuals to rate, on a seven-point scale, how satisfied or dissatisfied they are with their life overall. The latter is a widely used 12-item scale to measure a variety of components of mental well-being, such as anxiety, social dysfunction, and general happiness.

Using this data, we were able to track how the subjective well-being of various sub-groups in the population changed over time in response to inflows of migrants into their local area. We felt that an examination of subjective, as opposed to economic, indicators of well-being could help us better understand the sharp polarisation on immigration issues. Our intuition was that if migrants are perceived as a threat, irrespective of whether this is true or not, immigration could negatively impact some people's subjective well-being.

Explaining the identity divide
When we look at the UK population, we find that immigration may have some adverse consequences for subjective well-being, but these overall effects are small. What is of most interest is that this effect in the general population masks a lot of differences across population sub-groups, based on how people self-identify in terms of their national identity. To illustrate, when comparing the two largest national identity sub-groups in the UK, namely those who feel principally English versus those who feel principally British, we find that assessments of the effect of immigration on their self-reported life satisfaction are diametrically opposed. People who feel English appear to undergo a significant and substantive loss in their life satisfaction when faced with significant inflows of migrants into their local area, but for those who identify as British, the opposite is true. We observed similar (albeit less stark) differences between our English and British identity sub-groups when looking at the General Health Questionnaire.

The question then is, what explains these differences? Two theoretical frameworks, namely social identity theory and identity economics, used in social psychology and economics, respectively, offer important insights here. The basic idea behind social identity theory is that we are all predisposed to divide ourselves into in- and out-groups, and people belonging to the in-group are less likely to trust out-group members. We know from survey research that people who identify as English are more likely to see ancestry as a key criterion for national belonging and are therefore more likely than their British-identity counterparts to perceive migrants as belonging to an out-group.

Identity economics would suggest that migrants may have negative consequences for what economists refer to as identity utility, because they may be less likely to conform to the normative behavioural ideals associated with being English—given, amongst other things, differences in culture, religion and language.

We are not saying that one national identity is better or worse than the other (and of course some people will feel strong attachments to both) or even that everyone who feels English as opposed to British will feel worse off as a result of immigration. Rather, we are saying that if we look at people who feel English as opposed to British, they are, as a group, likely to feel an overall loss in their subjective well-being when faced with inflows of migrants into their local area. On the other hand, people who identify as British are more likely to witness an increase in their well-being. In these circumstances, the sharp polarisation on immigration issues is not just understandable but perhaps inevitable, as demographic change has sharply diverging subjective well-being impacts for different cohorts of the population.

Exploring the ethical complexity of food charity

Chancellor Jeremy Hunt did his very best to paint his Autumn Statement as progressive. Uprating benefits and the state pension in line with inflation, the handful of extra funding for the NHS and schools, and the increase in the "national living wage" concealed the measures which would make us poorer. It also drew attention away from the stark reality that families face a winter of hardship before benefits increase - and even then, support levels are too low to prevent millions from going hungry.

The number of people using a food bank continues to increase, from already shockingly high levels, as the ‘cost of living crisis' takes hold. The large food bank networks, the Trussell Trust and IFAN, along with many other anti-poverty campaigners, call attention to continued government cruelty and incompetence that drives poverty and food bank use. And rightly so, we are in desperate need of major policy change to stem growing hardship.

But the consequence of congregating around these narratives is that we ignore how food charity may in fact maintain the neoliberal policies and ideologies - individualism and surveillance, for instance - that it claims to counter. This is important. Hundreds of thousands use food banks on a monthly basis and many thousands more will do so during the coming inhospitable winter. Understanding the experiences of people inside the food bank, as well as the role that food charity may play in maintaining our current systems of oppression, is essential to both acknowledging the contemporary lived experience of poverty and to working towards a more progressive future.

The predominant voluntary sector response to hunger and destitution - food parcels or meals distributed in person to those in need - has failed to address the root causes of food insecurity (inadequate and insecure income, whether from employment and/or social security). The sector has, hence, perpetuated its own continuation and growth. Historical, albeit partial, resistance to the institutionalisation of food charity at both the local and national level was fatally undermined by the Coronavirus pandemic, as local and national government collaborated with food charity to manage growing need. As a consequence, food charity has and continues to facilitate public spending cuts within a wider context of neoliberalism. But the culpability of food charity for sustaining neoliberalism and the inequalities it creates goes beyond this.

Between 2014 and 2019, I spoke with representatives from many different types of food charity. Despite considerable diversity in operations, what was notable among some of these conversations was the stigma and condescension that service providers could express towards those using their services. Some providers framed the use of food charity as a ‘choice' borne of poor life decisions or inadequate cooking abilities; I was told of the elaborate strategies employed by food charities, particularly food banks, to monitor fraud. These narratives drew legitimacy from and further legitimated the classic deserving/undeserving divide while individualising food insecurity and obscuring the systemic issues which give rise to the use of food charity.

In food banks, especially Trussell Trust food banks, these stigmatising narratives were made real - they were tangible and visible - via a particular system of food access and distribution. The referral system, in which someone seeking food was required to first secure a referral to the food bank by a third party and provided with a paper voucher as proof, gave physical form to this undeserving/deserving divide. Within food banks, bureaucratised processes of food distribution disconnected the stigmatised and highly controlled act of collecting food (receipt of food was limited to three parcels in six months and the food provided consisted of a predefined parcel of ambient food) from care and advice provided by food bank volunteers. The operationalisation of the deserving/undeserving binary and ascription to stigmatising behavioural narratives of ‘choice' undermined solidarity among people seeking food, and between those providing and using the services. How could there be fellowship when people were divided, not only by bureaucratic processes, but also by the idea that some people were undeserving of food - they were not allowed to eat - because of their own character and behaviour?

Yet what was also noticeable from my fieldwork and is even more apparent as I write today, is the immense diversity that characterises food charity in the UK. Food charity is dominated by large, wealthy, corporatised hierarchical charities, most notably FareShare and the Trussell Trust (in 2020/21 the Trussell Trust had a total income of £57,782,000 and FareShare had an income of £72,068,000). However, it is increasingly composed of a ragtag bunch of small-scale groups and community organisations. For instance, a local councillor running a cheap café, a community centre holding a meal for residents twice weekly, and a lone parent selling fruit and vegetables at wholesale prices. These grassroots initiatives are largely open access, they tend to resist (sometimes assertively) collecting data on who visits for food, and they are often established by people with direct experience of poverty. These organisations and groups can be political spaces in which people come together as equals over a cooked meal, a piece of cake, a cup of tea to share their experiences and ideas for change. Like all forms of food charity these spaces will not solve food insecurity and poverty, but they may undermine the stigma associated with it and be a site where ideas, activism, and protest may develop.

I have written before, with Ruth Patrick, about the possibilities for hope that can come in contexts of despair. In the solidarity and activism that occurs in some small-scale food charities there are reasons to be hopeful. Hopeful that, despite a policy context that routinely fails to properly address the needs of low-income households, food charities, now so common place, can cultivate the resistance that is needed if we are to eventually see policy and political change. When you are next in a supermarket and think of dropping a tin of beans into the Trussell Trust food bank collection point with hope of helping those in need, consider for a moment how the food bank may be doing the opposite and look to local activism around food justice as a foundation for wider change.